+++
title = "Don't Think, Just Cook"
description = "The start of it all"
tags = [
    "motivation","productivity"
]
date = "2018-09-17"
+++

You are a maximizer.

No task gets done unless you’ve read five articles that disagree with one another on how to get things started. You want things to be done right the first time. It takes you twenty minutes to decide what movie you want to watch on Netflix, not because you can’t find anything interesting, but because you have this nagging feeling that there’s always something better a click away. It isn’t a stretch to say that you are the type of lad who browses, highlights, and annotates the entire cookbook before ever stepping foot in the kitchen.

You appreciate the analogy, but you assert that you’re actually quite different in the kitchen.

Recipes are important of course, but no list of ingredients, no sequence of instructions, will ever sate your appetite. You often start cooking by Googling the recipe. Within a minute, you lock-in your source and get down to business. In fact, you find the recipes suggested on the back of the box as sufficient enough of a guide.

You find it difficult to keep track of multiple ingredients at once. Frying fish while also peeling potatoes would likely end up with either a burnt cream dory, or worse, a nicked finger. With that in mind, you shy away from multitasking in the kitchen.

You admit that the best part of the culinary acts isn’t in the result, but in the process.

You find yourself kind of lucky that you have the time to cook, or at least that’s the idea you get from your peers. “Oh, you make your own meals? Goodness, where do you find the time?” You answer with “Patience.”

But to call it patience isn’t quite the right word for you, isn’t it. You cook; not because you need to, but because you want to. Similarly, you don’t cook because you wish to be a great chef, though that would be a noble goal on its own; you do it because making something on your own is so innately satisfying to you. You just have to do it.

Yes, you admit that recreating your mother’s spaghetti is harder than it looks. And you can never really quite get that perfect sunny-side up . But that’s okay. You still get to eat it anyway. In the kitchen, you aren’t a maximizer. In the kitchen, you don’t think about what other people will think about your experimental hodge-podge fried rice recipe made from yesterday’s leftovers. When you’re at the stove, you just cook. No doubts, no hesitations, no backing out.

In the kitchen, you are an executor.

Still, outside the kitchen, you tell yourself that you’re a maximizer. You pat yourself on the back every time you finish a book, or make a plan, or organize your desk, or make an ambitious promise to yourself. But where is the maximizing in that?

You imagine a cook’s daily routine. The cook keeps his work space clean, makes sure the ingredients are of decent quality, plans his meal-making—but does he stop there? If that were the case, he would end up with a fully-stocked shelf of produce, empty bellies from disgruntled patrons, and a stern reprimand from his manager. You feel sorry for him.  It is obvious to you, ingredients don’t cook themselves.

You’ve amassed a plethora of books, tutorials, videos, podcasts, workshops, classes, lectures, notes written on your phone, notes written on paper, marginalia, highlighted quotes, screenshots, systems, folders, plans made for tomorrow, promises for yourself, dreams, nice-to-haves,  and wish-to-learns. All of this, yet you haven’t really done anything with them. You are like a master chef who doesn’t cook. Which is to say, not very much a master chef at all.

But there is a solution to all of this. And no, it isn’t another self-help book, or a better to-do list app, or an article on the Top Five Ways To Stop Procrastination, Number #4 Will Surprise You. It can’t be found highlighted in a page, in between quotation marks, or in a TED talk.

It’s not about what you have right now. It’s about what you do with them. And thus lies the crux of the matter. Before worrying about excellence, you really should try getting things done first. Skilled programmers are well-aware of the coding adage: Premature optimization is the root of all evil! You are still not quite sure whether to believe the coders or the Bible on that one, but it is clear to you that stressing too much on getting everything right will just hinder you from making that first few steps.

The cook never enjoys shopping for the highest quality ingredients more than the actual process of cooking. He most certainly doesn’t enjoy it more than hearing complements from the people he serves. Such a cook would be absurd.  He’ll be content just by having getting the freshest, tastiest, healthiest ingredient. He would find no reason to use any of  the recipes he learned. And even worse a crime, he keeps that knowledge all to himself!

You realize that a true maximizer would rather fail as soon as possible than avoid doing the first step.  You want to get the executor in you out of the kitchen for once. You have  many other things in your life that you want to do without hesitation the same way you saute your greens. You imagine all those side projects you could have completed, all those words that you kept for yourself. No longer will you stop at the planning stage. No more worrying about whether what you make is good enough for others. You are an executor.

And that is why you decided to write this.